---
title: "Neural population geometry and optimal coding of tasks with shared latent structure"
authors: "Albert J. Wakhloo, Will Slatton & SueYeon Chung"
source_url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-025-02183-y
fetched: 2026-04-09
---

# Neural population geometry and optimal coding of tasks with shared latent structure

## Abstract

Animals can recognize latent structures in their environment and apply this information to efficiently navigate the world. Several works argue that the brain supports these abilities by forming neural representations from which behaviorally relevant variables can be read out across contexts and tasks. However, it is unclear which features of neural activity facilitate downstream readout. Here we analytically determine the geometric properties of neural activity that govern linear readout generalization on a set of tasks sharing a common latent structure. We show that four statistics summarizing the dimensionality, factorization and correlation structures of neural activity determine generalization. Early in learning, optimal neural representations are lower dimensional and exhibit higher correlations between single units and task variables than late in learning. We support these predictions through biological and artificial neural data analysis. Our results tie the linearly decodable information in neural population activity to its geometry.

## Abstract

Animals can recognize latent structures in their environment and apply this information to efficiently navigate the world. Several works argue that the brain supports these abilities by forming neural representations from which behaviorally relevant variables can be read out across contexts and tasks. However, it is unclear which features of neural activity facilitate downstream readout. Here we analytically determine the geometric properties of neural activity that govern linear readout generalization on a set of tasks sharing a common latent structure. We show that four statistics summarizing the dimensionality, factorization and correlation structures of neural activity determine generalization. Early in learning, optimal neural representations are lower dimensional and exhibit higher correlations between single units and task variables than late in learning. We support these predictions through biological and artificial neural data analysis. Our results tie the linearly decodable information in neural population activity to its geometry.

## Main

Humans constantly solve different instances of similar problems. We brake at stop signs, stop at red lights and slow down in crowded streets. We do these things effortlessly and efficiently learn to use new sensory cues to regulate our behavior. This is possible because we are able to recognize overt symbols such as road signs as well as more abstract visual cues such as the crowdedness of a street. More generally, humans and other animals learn to recognize latent variables in their environment and use them to guide their behavior across contexts and tasks.

Recent experimental findings have described coding strategies that may underlie this ability. In particular, several studies have described cases where independent variables in the environment are represented along distinct directions of variation in the neuronal activity space1,2,3,4,5,6,7—for example, in orthogonal subspaces of the firing rates of a collection of neurons2,7,8,9. These independent factors have ranged from the contacts of distinct mouse whiskers2 to more abstract latent variables, such as the values of different choices in a decision-making task3. Neural representations in which distinct environmental variables are represented along independent or orthogonal directions of variation are referred to as factorized or disentangled. Factorized representations were recently shown to emerge in artificial networks trained on multiple tasks8 and are thought to support generalization to new contexts as well as efficient learning of new tasks that depend on shared latent variables4,10.

In a related line of work, studies have argued that the brain makes widespread use of cognitive maps to solve these problems11. These are coding strategies in which environmental variables are represented in the population code in a way that preserves task-relevant relations between them. This idea is supported by a range of findings—for example, studies in which structurally similar tuning profiles emerge in a neural population for distinct types of environmental variables12,13,14,15,16,17. These variables have ranged from an animal’s position to the frequency of an auditory stimulus12 to more abstract quantities, such as the amount of evidence accumulated in a decision-making task14. Here and in the findings referenced above, neural populations represent latent structure in the environment in a way that supports a target behavior. However, defining measures for and understanding why certain neural activity patterns represent latent variables in task-efficient ways remains challenging18.

A promising approach to tying neural activity patterns to computational goals is to study the geometry of neural responses19. Here, the overarching idea is to find which mesoscopic statistics of the population activity contribute to a macroscopic target computation or behavior. In this way, we can gain insight into neural computation without having to give a detailed account of microscopic single-unit activity. For example, in the domain of invariant object recognition, recent works analytically tied coding efficiency20,21,22,23 and few-shot generalization performance24 to measurable statistics of the population activity. In a related line of work, several studies tied the structure of neural correlations and population-level statistics to the information content of neural codes25,26,27,28,29. Recent studies have also investigated a wide range of motor30,31, sensory2,6,15,32,33,34,35 and decision-making3,4,13,14 computations and behaviors by analyzing the geometry of neural population responses.

In the present study, we develop an analytical theory for learning binary decision-making tasks depending on a common latent structure that directly ties the statistics of neural population responses to generalization performance. Although several authors have used linear probes or heuristic geometric measures to analyze population activity in such tasks (for example, refs. 2,4), to our knowledge there is no cohesive theory that directly ties mesoscopic statistical features of neural activity to task performance in these settings. To fill this gap, we analytically calculate how neural population geometry shapes the generalization error of an agent learning multiple tasks that depend on a common latent structure.

## Results

Geometric measures govern generalization of linear readouts

We study the ability of a neural population to support downstream learning of tasks that depend on a common latent structure. To do this, we start by considering a set of stimuli that vary along a few latent dimensions. For example, in the dSprites dataset depicted in Fig. 1a,b, different images can be described in terms of the shape, position and orientation of the shape in each image36. Within our modeling framework, this corresponds to the assumption that each stimulus can be mapped to a vector z in an underlying d-dimensional latent space. In response to each stimulus, we consider a vector x of neural responses—for example, the firing rates of a population of neurons to each image in the dataset (Fig. 1c). Thus, our modeling framework considers datasets comprising latent vectors describing individual stimuli, together with neural activity patterns associated with each stimulus.

Fig. 1: Schematic of the task and model setup using images from the dSprites dataset as an example.
Full size image

a,b, Stimuli in the dataset vary along a few latent dimensions, corresponding to the shape, orientation and position of the object. Thus, points in the latent space (a) can be directly mapped to visual stimuli (b). We form binary discrimination tasks, such as hearts versus circles, by linearly separating the latent space using a hyperplane with normal T1. c, Each stimulus elicits a neural activity pattern, visualized as points in an activity space. We form a linear readout of the neural activity by considering the difference between the mean activity pattern for circles (dark red) and hearts (dark blue). This readout corresponds to the activity of an idealized downstream unit with synaptic weights set by a supervised Hebbian learning rule (Methods)40. d,e, A new binary discrimination task (small versus big shapes) can be formed by separating the same set of stimuli using a different hyperplane with normal T2. f, For this task, the same supervised Hebbian rule leads to a new neural readout.

Within this setting, we determine how well neural responses can be used to solve binary tasks involving the latent variables. The task labels for a given binary classification task are formed by linearly separating the latent space into two pieces using a hyperplane with normal vector T37,38,39,40. In the example shown in Fig. 1, different choices of T generate shape categorization (Fig. 1a,b) or size categorization (Fig. 1d,e) tasks. Note that, although the separation is linear in the latent space, it may be highly nonlinear in the stimulus space.

We quantify how well these neural activity patterns support downstream classification by considering the performance of a simple linear readout mechanism. Specifically, we calculate the generalization error of an idealized downstream unit that receives inputs from all neurons in the population and adjusts its synaptic weights according to a supervised Hebbian plasticity rule (Methods). The activity of this downstream unit is then determined by a weighted summation of its inputs, followed by a threshold operation. This unit’s activity acts as a difference of means classifier when the number of labels for each class is equal (Fig. 1c–f)40. We calculate the generalization error of this readout after being trained on a dataset of p-many stimuli both for a single, fixed task (for example, the hearts versus circles task in Fig. 1b) as well as the average generalization error across all possible tasks. In this way, we connect the statistical properties of the neural code to the multitask learning problem.

Using this simplified model, we derive a formula for the average generalization error. As described in the Supplementary Information, we prove that, under a certain Gaussian approximation, the error Eg is given by

$${E}_{g}=\frac{1}{\pi }{\tan }^{-1}\left(\sqrt{\frac{\pi }{2p{c}^{2}{\rm{PR}}(\mathbf{\Psi} )}+\frac{1}{f}+\frac{1}{s}-1}\right),$$	(1)

where we have written the generalization error as a strictly decreasing function of four geometric terms as well as the number of samples in the training dataset, p. In Fig. 2, we visualize different geometries that could arise in response to a fixed set of stimuli (Fig. 2a). We now discuss each of these terms one by one (see Methods for precise definitions and Supplementary Information section 3 for details):

Neural–latent correlation: c. This term is a normalized sum of squared covariances between neurons and latent variables. As such, it measures the overall correlation between single-unit responses and latent variables. At the population level, the neural–latent correlation measures how sensitive the population activity is to variations in the latent space (Fig. 2b).

Signal–signal factorization (SSF): f. This term measures the alignment between the coding directions of distinct latent variables. The SSF term favors neural coding schemes that represent independent latent variables along uncorrelated directions in the neural state space. Moreover, this term encourages these representations to devote equal variance to each independent latent factor—that is, to form a whitened representation of the latents (Fig. 2c).

Signal–noise factorization (SNF): s. This term measures the magnitude of the noise that lies along the coding directions of the latent variables. Ideally, any noise present in the neural responses should lie in directions that are uncorrelated with the directions representing the latent variables25,27 (Fig. 2d).

Neural dimension: \({\mathrm{PR}}({\mathbf{\Psi}})\). The participation ratio of the neural responses measures the effective number of dimensions that the population activity spans. When all else is equal, higher-dimensional responses are preferred, as neuronal noise is less correlated from trial to trial24 (Fig. 2e).

Finally, we note that the contribution to the error of the neural dimension and neural–latent correlation decays to zero with the number of training samples (Methods). On the other hand, the error stemming from the SSF and SNF represents an ‘irreducible error’ that does not depend on the number of training samples. Intuitively, in the few-shot regime, the main concern is maximizing the amount of total signal in the neural code while minimizing the impact of noise. These two aspects are primarily controlled by the total correlation and dimension, respectively. On the other hand, in the many-shot regime, the main concern becomes keeping the representations of distinct latent variables separate from one another and separate from noise directions. The two factorization terms control these features of the code. These considerations suggest that certain geometries, which perform well early in learning, when p is small, may be suboptimal late in learning. We make these intuitions precise in ‘Optimal representation of latent variables’ below.

Fig. 2: Schematic of the geometric terms.
Full size image

We visualize different possible neuronal activity patterns elicited by the same set of stimuli. a, A small slice of the latent space from which stimuli are generated. b, Visualization of neural activity patterns responding to this set of stimuli with low (left) and high (right) total correlation. When the correlation is high, the relative distances between points in the latent space are approximately preserved in the neural state space. c, SSF. When the SSF is low, different latent variables are represented along overlapping directions; when it is high, independent latent variables are represented along uncorrelated directions of variability in the neural state space. d, SNF. When the SNF is low, the noise distribution (gray ellipses) around a point in the firing rate space falls along the coding directions; when it is high, the noise distribution is uncorrelated with these directions. e, Neural dimension. In higher-dimensional representations, the neural activity and associated noise distribution occupy more directions in the state space, shown here as two-dimensional (left) versus three-dimensional (right) noise distributions. As the dimension increases, the projection of a sample of neural activity onto a given direction becomes increasingly concentrated, supporting generalization performance24.

Geometry of multitask learning in multilayer perceptrons

In practice, neural data are complex and may be non-Gaussian. To test our theory in this regime, we now apply our formula for the generalization error (equation (1)) and its geometric decomposition to both random and trained nonlinear multilayer perceptrons (MLPs). As shown in Fig. 3a, we first sample a set of zero mean Gaussian latent variables z. We then feed these latent variables through a random MLP with increasing hidden layer sizes. After generating this set of stimuli, we sample 500 random T vectors and use these to generate a set of task labels (Methods). These labels and data points from the random MLP are then used to train a downstream three-hidden-layer MLP, which predicts the label for each task using a task-specific linear readout from the shared penultimate layer. This is a multilayer version of the hidden manifold modeling framework from ref. 38. Finally, we sample a new set of latent variables along with a new set of tasks and calculate the generalization error of the Hebbian rule when applied to the representations at different layers of the trained and untrained MLPs (Methods). This setup allows us to validate our theory on nonlinear transformations of Gaussian latent variables.

Fig. 3: Theory predicts generalization error of the Hebbian rule in trained and random MLPs.
Full size image

a, Schematic of the simulation. Latent variables z are randomly shattered to generate task labels. These latents are passed through a random MLP (light blue) and are then used as inputs to train a three-hidden-layer MLP (dark blue) on the multitask binary classification problem using stochastic gradient descent. b,c, After training, we sample a new set of latents and teacher vectors and calculate the generalization error of the Hebbian rule on each layer of the random (b) and trained (c) network. Theoretical predictions closely track empirical errors, and the trained network achieves a lower error in later layers. d–g, Geometric terms across layers for the random (light blue line) and trained (dark blue line) networks. Linear layers are marked by circles and ReLU layers by squares. Interestingly, the error only slightly changes across linear and ReLU layers of the same model stage, in spite of sharp changes in the geometry. In the trained network, the application of ReLU consistently causes increases in the dimension and SSF as well as decreases in the correlation.

As shown in Fig. 3b,c, we find good agreement between our formula, equation (1), and the empirical generalization error. Turning to our geometric decomposition of the error, we find several interesting trends across layers and nonlinearities (Fig. 3d–g). Most notably, in the trained network, we find that linear and rectified linear unit (ReLU) layers orchestrate a tradeoff between the geometric terms that together lead to an overall decrease in multitask generalization error. As shown in Fig. 3d–g, the neural dimension spikes each time the nonlinearity is applied, at the cost of the total correlation. Conversely, at each linear layer, the correlation sharply rises while the dimension falls. On the other hand, we find that both the SSF and SNF terms monotonically increase through the penultimate layer of the network. Notably, this pattern is not present in the random network. Thus, the trained MLP learns to use the nonlinearity to increase the dimension of the representation as well as the factorization of the latent variables while simultaneously squashing particularly harmful noisy directions of variability in the input. We visualize the training dynamics that lead to these representations in Supplementary Fig. 4. Although these are sharp changes in the geometry, the overall generalization error across layers exhibits only minor fluctuations between most linear and ReLU layers, highlighting the limitations of a generalization error-based approach to analyzing network activity without studying the underlying geometry.

Disentangling in deep pose estimation networks

To test the validity of our theory on more complex natural data, we study the representations of animal pose in a deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) trained to estimate pose parameters from natural images (Fig. 4a)41,42. In this setup, the d = 24 dimensional latent variables \(\mathbf{z}\in {{\mathbb{R}}}^{24}\) consist of (x, y) coordinates for 12 different ‘marker’ locations on a mouse’s body (for example, the left paw or the tip of the tail). We calculate the average multitask error generated by randomly shattering this latent space (Fig. 4a) both empirically and using our formula, equation (1). The distribution of the latent variables is highly non-Gaussian and provides a challenge for our theory. The pose estimation network consists of a fine-tuned ResNet50 and a final trained deconvolutional layer with 12 output channels, one for each marker location. This can be viewed as a multitask architecture in which the output of the fine-tuned ResNet50 produces a shared representation that is read out by 12 different deconvolution kernels to estimate the position of each independent marker.

Fig. 4: Disentangling of animal pose parameters by a deep neural network.
Full size image

Data are reported as means ± s.e.m., where statistics are over 20 random projections of the network representations down to a fixed dimensionality of n = 100. a, A DCNN trained with the DeepLabCut framework41 predicts the position of 12 markers (only three are illustrated here) in unlabeled images of an adult mouse (N = 1) (Methods and ref. 42). We treat the d = 24 total (x, y) coordinates of these marker positions as latent variables and study how the DCNN disentangles them from the image inputs. b, The total dimensionality of the DCNN’s intermediate representations increases across layers. c, The total correlation between the latents and the network’s internal representations decays across layers, representing a tradeoff with dimensionality. d,e, Both SSF and SNF improve monotonically across layers. f, Multitask error decreases across layers, indicating successful and gradual disentangling of the latent variables across layers of the DCNN. Here, p = 150 training samples are used, and we calculate the error using equation (1). g, Our theoretical expression for multitask error in terms of our four geometric terms is not quantitatively exact for this complex natural dataset but, nonetheless, captures essentially all variance in the true multitask error. h, For each pair of adjacent layers in the network, we plot the change in the neural–latent correlation and the dimensionality term.

The task-averaged generalization error Eg improves across the layers of the network (Fig. 4f). Interestingly, the geometric changes driving this improvement in Eg are qualitatively different than in the random MLP case. We observe a similar tradeoff between the dimension and correlation terms at each layer (Fig. 4h, compare to Fig. 3d,e), but this network prioritizes expanding the data dimensionality (Fig. 4b) while sacrificing correlation (Fig. 4c). In this more challenging setting with highly non-Gaussian latents and complex natural inputs, our analytical expression for Eg is slightly biased (Fig. 4g). However, the analytical prediction for Eg still linearly explains practically all of the variance in the empirically computed multitask error (R2 = 0.988). Thus, our geometric terms capture the representational changes that drive the observed trends in Eg.

Predicting readout performance of macaque visual representations

Having considered nonlinear artificial neural networks, we now apply our theory to biological neural data. To do this, we draw from preexisting multi-unit recordings from macaque V4 and inferior temporal cortex (IT) taken while two monkeys viewed visual stimuli (Methods and Fig. 5a–c)43. The stimuli used in these experiments included images of 64 objects taken from eight categories and were generated by modifying d = 6 continuous latent variables that included the size, position and angle of the object. This allows us to form binary classification task labels by shattering this six-dimensional latent space on subsets of the data corresponding to individual object categories; for example, a given task could involve separating images of chairs on the left side of the screen from those on the right. We test the validity of our generalization error equation, equation (1), by calculating the error of Hebbian readouts applied to V4 and IT neural responses as well as the raw pixel values. We find that our formula accurately predicts the generalization error, particularly for the neural response readouts (Fig. 5d). Furthermore, we find that generalization error improves through the ventral stream, in line with previous results44.

Fig. 5: Theory predicts multitask error in macaque V4 and IT data.
Full size image

a,b, Example stimuli and tasks43. Visual stimuli included 64 objects grouped into eight categories and were generated by modifying d = 6 continuous latent variables that included object size, position and angle. We form binary classification tasks on subsets of the data coming from the same category—for example, all images from the ‘Tables’ category. c, Array placement. Figure was adapted with permission from ref. 43. d, Generalization error across pixels and brain regions calculated empirically (markers) and using our formula for the generalization error (solid line). Error bars denote the standard error across categories. e–h, Geometric terms across pixels and neural responses for each category. Bars denote the mean, and asterisks denote a significant difference (P < 0.01, two-sided paired t-test, N = 8 object categories; Supplementary Table 1). NS, not significant.

From equation (1), we can see that there are many different geometries that yield the same generalization error. Thus, it is a priori unclear how these measures ought to change from the pixel space through the ventral stream. Applying our geometric decomposition of the generalization error to these data, we find that the dimension is lower in V4 than in either IT or the pixel data24 (Fig. 5e) and that the correlation increases from the pixels to the visual areas. The transformation from pixels to V4 is reminiscent of the tension we found between correlation and dimension in the preceding sections, whereby transformations that improve generalization error by increasing neural–latent correlation can sometimes do so at the price of a slightly lower dimension (and vice versa). Turning to the factorization measures, the most dramatic trend is the increase in SNF in IT. This suggests that, in IT, latent-unrelated variability overlaps less with the coding directions than in V4 or the pixels (Fig. 5e–h). Taken together, these results show that our formula for the generalization error (equation (1)) captures empirical readout performance and demonstrates the applicability of our metrics as a tool for tying the geometry of neuronal population responses to the computational objective of multitask learning.

Optimal representation of latent variables

Our theory provides an ideal framework to pose normative questions regarding multitask learning. In our model, latent variables that have less variance contain, on average, less information about the task labels (Fig. 6a and Supplementary Information section 4). For the data analyses presented in the previous section, we normalize the latent variables so that they are all weighted equally. However, this aspect of our framework allows us to study how the structure of the latent variables and the number of available training samples determine which neural representations are optimal.

Fig. 6: Optimal representational geometry over learning.
Full size image

a, In our task setup, directions in the latent space that have little variance are, on average, less informative of the task labels (Methods and Supplementary Information section 4). b, Eigenvalues of the optimal neural covariance as a function of the number of samples per latent dimension, p / d. We show the eigenvalues of the latent variables’ covariance in black. Markers correspond to results obtained by optimizing our formula for the generalization error numerically, and solid lines correspond to our formula for the optimal code’s spectrum (Methods). As training proceeds (that is, as p increases), the spectrum of the optimal neural code becomes increasingly flat. c–e, Optimal representational geometry at different stages of training. Early in training, optimal representations have a higher neural–latent correlation and a lower dimension and SSF than they do late in training. (Note that we do not plot the SNF, as optimal representations in our framework are noiseless or have noise that is uncorrelated with the signal directions. In this regime, the SNF diverges for all p).

We show analytically that the optimal representation disentangles latent variables (Supplementary Information section 4). More precisely, we show that when the latent variables are not correlated with one another, neural responses represent distinct latent variables along orthogonal directions. When the latent variables are correlated with one another, we show that the principal components of the latent variables directly map onto the (mutually orthogonal) principal components of the neural activity (Supplementary Information section 4). Thus, disentangled representations are optimal in this framework.

How does the structure of the latent variables and the degree of learning affect the geometry of optimal neural representations? In addition to being disentangled, we find that the optimal code compresses less informative variables early in learning (that is, when p is small) and expands these variables late in learning. For an optimal code, independent latent variables are represented along uncorrelated directions; however, the variance along each direction is not equal. As shown in Fig. 6a, early in training, less informative latent variables correspond to directions in the neuronal activity space that have small variance. As learning proceeds (that is, as p increases), the amount of variance in neural space dedicated to these less informative latent variables grows (Methods and Supplementary Information section 4). Intuitively, the optimal code only starts paying attention to the less informative latent variables when there are enough samples to learn their relevance to a given task.

We trace these features of the optimal neural code back to the eigenvalues of the neuronal covariance matrix and our geometric terms. As shown in Fig. 6b, the eigenspectrum of the optimal code becomes increasingly flat over the course of learning. This reflects the fact that more and more variance is being dedicated to the less informative directions in the latent space (that is, directions with smaller variance). Arranging the eigenvalues of the latent variables’ covariance matrix in descending order, ω1 ≥ω2 ≥ … ≥ ωd, we show that the optimal code’s covariance matrix has at least d non-zero eigenvalues that are given by:

$${\psi }_{i}=C\frac{{\omega }_{i}}{2p{\omega }_{i}+\pi {\sum }_{k}{\omega }_{k}},$$	(2)

where C is an arbitrary constant. We can see that, as p grows, the spectrum becomes increasingly flat, reflecting the expansion strategy (Methods and Supplementary Information section 4).

Turning to our geometric measures, we find that, early in training, optimal neural codes are lower dimensional with higher neural–latent correlations than they are late in training (Fig. 6c–e). A key normative prediction from our theory is, therefore, that the task-related variability—that is, the signal variance—of neural responses becomes increasingly high dimensional as an agent learns to perform tasks that depend on a complex latent structure. Moreover, these results suggest that the strength of the correlations between single units and task variables may decrease in the late stages of learning. We present evidence for these predictions in the following section.

Geometry of spatial representations in prefrontal cortex and CA1 during learning

We now analyze the geometry of navigational representations in prefrontal cortex (PFC) and CA1 as rats learn to perform a continuous alternation task over the course of eight sessions (Fig. 7a,b)45. To do this, we analyze the degree to which an animal’s position and velocity can be decoded from population firing rates. Specifically, we treat the animal’s x and y position and velocity as latent variables from which we form binary classification tasks (Fig. 7c). We then calculate the task-averaged readout error, Eg, and geometric measures from PFC and CA1 firing rate data for each session (n ≥ 19 units; Methods). The session-by-session neural readout errors Eg thus quantify the ability of a linear readout to decode position and velocity information through the course of learning. These readout errors decrease over learning (Fig. 7e,f) and are correlated with single-session behavioral task performance (R2 = 0.48 (CA1) and R2 = 0.51 (PFC); Supplementary Fig. 12c).

Fig. 7: Changes in the geometry of spatial representations during learning in PFC (solid) and CA1 (dashed).
Full size image

a, Multi-unit recordings were obtained from medial PFC and dorsal CA1 (ref. 45). Figure is adapted from ref. 45. b, Rats performed a continuous alternation task in a W-maze. c, For our multitask readout analysis, we treated the x and y positions and velocity values as latent variables from which binary classification tasks were formed. d,e, Behavioral error on the continuous alternation task and neural readout error quickly decrease over the first few sessions, leading to a large correlation between the behavioral and readout errors on single sessions (R2 = 0.49 (CA1) and R2 = 0.51 (PFC); Supplementary Fig. 12c). f, Empirical generalization error versus our estimate from equation (1). Although there is a small bias for low error values, we find a good agreement overall. g–k, Geometric terms over the course of learning. Lines denote the mean within a region, and error bars denote the standard error (N = 8 rats).

We now analyze the trends in the readout error and geometry during learning. Over the first four sessions, both behavioral and neural readout error rapidly improve (Fig. 7d,e). During this time, nearly every geometric measure increases (Fig. 7h–k). Interestingly, we find that although the total neural dimension drops over these initial sessions (Fig. 7g), the dimension of the subspace containing task-relevant variability increases (Fig. 7h) (Methods). This suggests that the initial drop in the dimension is driven by a compression of navigation-irrelevant activity. After session four, both behavioral and readout error largely plateau. At this point, several of these initial trends reverse; in particular, the total dimension begins to increase, whereas the correlation drops.

To test the significance of these non-monotonic effects of learning on the geometry, we fit mixed-effects quadratic regression models for each geometric term (Methods and Supplementary Fig. 12). We found strong, significant effects for both the linear and quadratic terms in PFC and CA1 for the total dimension, correlation and SNF (P < 10−5; Supplementary Table 2). In each case, the sign of the quadratic term was the opposite of the linear term, demonstrating the non-monotonic effects of learning on these quantities. We did not find evidence for a non-monotonic trend in the SSF in either region (P > 0.05). Although we did find weaker significant effects of the quadratic model for the task-relevant dimension (P < 0.01), the model was a comparatively poorer fit to this quantity in PFC (Supplementary Fig. 12). As such, we carried out a follow-up analysis using mixed-effect linear models, which demonstrated significant, monotonic effects of learning on the SSF and task-relevant dimension across both regions (P < 10−3 SSF and P < 10−5 task dimension; Supplementary Table 2).

How do these trends in the geometry align with our normative predictions? In the previous section, we analyzed the behavior of optimal representations over the course of learning. However, the initial state of the network is likely far from any kind of optimality, as suggested by the very large drops in behavioral error (Fig. 7d), readout error (Fig. 7e) and increases in nearly every geometric measure (Fig. 7h–k) over the first four sessions. (Indeed, we find similar geometric trends for the training dynamics of the multi-task MLPs around initialization (Supplementary Fig. 4).) Once the readout and behavioral errors begin to plateau at session four, we find that the ensuing trends are consistent with our predictions for optimal representations: the dimensionality measures and SSF increase over learning, whereas the neural–latent correlation decreases. In other words, once the network has formed a representation from which task variables can be efficiently decoded, the trends in the geometry align with the behavior we found for optimal representations over learning.

## Discussion

In this work, we analyzed a model of learning multiple tasks that share a common latent structure. We showed that the generalization error in this model decomposes into four terms summarizing the correlation structures, factorization and dimension of the neural activity. Our work complements previous studies of multitask learning46,47,48 and neural correlations25,26,27,29,49,50,51,52 by analytically describing how noise correlation structures interact with signal correlations, dimensionality and signal factorization to collectively determine readout generalization performance.

We leveraged these analytical results to determine which geometries minimize the generalization error, given a fixed latent structure and number of available training samples. In addition to being disentangled, we found that the task-relevant subspace of optimal neural codes shifts from being low to high dimensional as the number of available samples increases. This reflects a strategy of compressing less useful information when data are scarce and expanding it when data are abundant. Note that, in a given dataset, low-variance latent variables may be of greater interest than those with high variance. To apply our theory to such situations, one can bias the linear shatterings to emphasize low-variance latent variables. As discussed at the end of Supplementary Information section 1, this is equivalent to rescaling individual latent variables.

It is interesting to compare these findings to previous work reporting that higher-dimensional representations of individual object classes are preferred for invariant object recognition in the few-shot learning setting24. Although the contribution to the error of the neural dimension scales as 1 / p in our formula just as in this work, the additional contribution to the error of the SSF and SNF terms, together with the constraint of the covariance matrix remaining positive semi-definite, leads to optimal representations with lower dimension in the few-shot regime. These results highlight the fact that different geometric terms may compete with each other in ways that cannot be directly read off from generalization error equations when there are additional constraints imposed on the system.

These optimal coding trends may hold for other forms of readout, beyond the Hebbian learning rule considered here. In particular, theories of linear least squares estimation suggest that similar phenomena may occur for regression tasks with more complex readouts53,54,55,56. Furthermore, we compared our theoretically calculated Hebbian readout error to the empirical generalization error of a linear support vector classifier (SVC) trained on the same tasks. Across every analysis reported in this paper, we found a strong correlation between SVC and Hebbian errors, particularly in the brain data, suggesting that the geometric terms described here are also informative of the generalization errors of other linear readouts (Supplementary Fig. 3). A related line of work has considered the role of neural dimension in random pattern separation57,58,59. In these settings, the optimal dimension can decrease when neural noise increases, and future work can examine whether a similar relation holds in the multitask learning setting considered here.

To test our theory, we first carried out a series of analyses on artificial networks. Across both networks, we found a tension between the neural dimension and correlation: layers that yielded a sharp increase in the dimension typically did so at the cost of the correlation and vice versa. These results illustrate a tradeoff between a population code’s dimensionality and the amount of correlated variability between single units and task variables. In light of previous work demonstrating the interaction between the baseline firing rate of a population and neuronal correlations, it would be interesting to analyze how population sparsity and single-unit response reliability interact with the neural dimension and our neural–latent correlation statistic in recordings or models of tuned sensory neurons28,29.

We next applied our theory to electrophysiological recordings from macaque V4 and IT43 as well as navigational representations in rat CA1 and PFC45. Both of these analyses were carried out using multi-unit recordings, and, thus, these trends should be interpreted with caution. Geometric measures calculated from these recordings, such as the neural dimension, may not necessarily be indicative of the dimension of the entire population within a region. For example, the local similarity of tuning properties within certain visual regions may artificially decrease dimension, and systematic differences in recording quality between regions could artificially inflate the SNF estimates. Although these caveats should be kept in mind, we found a sharp increase in the SNF from the pixels and V4 to IT, suggesting that latent-unrelated variability may become increasingly orthogonal to the coding directions through the ventral stream. Indeed, orthogonalization of neural variability was previously observed in early visual areas, and it would be interesting to study the evolution of this phenomenon across the cortical hierarchy25,34.

Turning to the rat CA1 and PFC analyses, we found that the SSF and the dimension of the subspace containing task-relevant navigational information increase over the course of learning. Furthermore, we found that the correlation first increases and then decreases. These trends are consistent with the predictions that we derived by considering optimal neural representations. Together, these results demonstrate the applicability of our theory to probing neural representations across brain regions and through learning.

In this work, we analyzed linear readout applied to tasks that came from shattering a continuous latent space. Determining which geometric measures are relevant for common nonlinear decoders remains an important open problem. Furthermore, our modeling framework makes several distributional assumptions, and future work could extend this theory to consider distributions of latents and tasks that more closely mirror common experimental settings. One could repeat our general calculation while restricting the distribution of task vectors to a handful of relevant directions or restricting the distribution of latent variables to be fixed to discrete values. This would be particularly interesting in settings where only particular groups of tasks or latent variable values are relevant for an animal to consider. As a further extension, it would be interesting to extend this work to consider the generalization error on a test set with distinct statistical properties. We plan to pursue these lines of research in subsequent work.

## Methods

Model of multitask learning

We model a setting in which an agent learns a set of binary classification tasks by performing linear readout on a set of neural activity vectors. Formally, we assume that each stimulus is associated with a d-dimensional latent vector \({\mathbf{z}}_{\mu }\in {{\mathbb{R}}}^{d}\), with 1 ≤ μ ≤ p denoting the sample index. The labels for a specific task are formed by shattering the latent space using a hyperplane with a normal vector, T. Thus, the binary classification task labels, yμ, satisfy the relation, yμ = sign(T·zμ), so that each T vector defines a specific classification task. Associated with each latent, we also consider n-dimensional neural activity patterns, \({\mathbf{x}}_{\mu }\in {{\mathbb{R}}}^{n}\). From these data, the agent then forms predictions of new data points using a supervised Hebbian readout rule40. More precisely, given a new stimulus associated with latent variables z+ and firing rates x+, the agent forms a prediction \({\hat{y}}_{+}\) using the rule

$${\hat{y}}_{+}={\rm{sign}}(\mathbf{w}\cdot {\mathbf{x}}_{+}),\quad \mathbf{w}=\frac{1}{p}\sum _{\mu }{y}_{\mu }{\mathbf{x}}_{\mu }.$$	(3)

When the labels are balanced, this corresponds to using the difference in the mean activities for positively and negatively labeled examples (Fig. 1f; see Supplementary Fig. 3 for results on SVC classifiers). We evaluate how well the neural code can support downstream classification by calculating the generalization error of these predictions, averaged across different tasks (that is, different T vectors), although we also calculate the error for a fixed T along the way (Supplementary Information section 1).

Although the generalization error for arbitrary distributions of neuronal activities and latent variables is analytically intractable, we show that, in many cases, the error only depends on a few key statistics. To do this, we draw from work in deep learning theory describing a Gaussian equivalence principle (GEP), which states that the generalization error of linear readouts trained on complex distributions can, in many cases, be well approximated by studying simpler Gaussian models38,39,60,61. We analytically calculate the generalization error using a Gaussian model and show empirically that our theory accurately predicts the generalization error of the linear readout rule when applied to more complex settings. Formally, we assume that each pair of neural responses and latent variables (xμ, zμ) are jointly zero mean Gaussians with covariance matrices:

$${\mathbb{E}}[\mathbf{xx}^{\top }]=\mathbf{\Psi} ,\quad {\mathbb{E}}[\mathbf{xz}^{\top }]=\mathbf{\Phi} ,\quad {\mathbb{E}}[\mathbf{zz}^{\top }]=\mathbf{\Omega} .$$	(4)

We can see that Ψ describes the neuron–neuron covariances; Φ contains the covariances between single-unit responses and the latent variables; and Ω describes covariances between latent variables in the dataset. This model corresponds to a variant of the popular student–teacher model37,39. Insofar as the GEP holds, the neuronal and latent (cross-)covariances fully specify the generalization error of the linear readout.

In our analyses below, we enforce the zero mean condition by centering the x and z data matrices. Note that because the T vectors are chosen randomly from a Gaussian distribution, the latent covariance Ω determines which directions in the latent space are, on average, most informative of the task labels. Directions in the latent space that have a significant amount of variance are, on average, more informative of the task labels in this setup (Supplementary Information section 4; note that one can simply whiten latent variables when applying this framework to data to circumvent this feature).

Decomposition of generalization error across tasks

We prove a formula for the generalization error of the linear readout, averaged across different binary classification tasks (that is, different T vectors). To do so, we consider the limiting case in which the number of neurons, latent dimensions and training samples are all large and of similar size. Furthermore, we assume that the covariance matrices given above satisfy certain spectral properties (Supplementary Information section 1). Under these assumptions, we show that the average generalization error, Eg, given a training dataset of size p, is a decreasing function of the four geometric terms. Formally, we have

$${E}_{g}=\frac{1}{\pi }{\tan }^{-1}\left(\sqrt{\frac{\pi }{2p{c}^{2}{\rm{PR}}(\mathbf{\Psi} )}+\frac{1}{f}+\frac{1}{s}-1}\right),$$	(5)

where we have introduced the total neural–latent correlation c, the SSF f, the SNF s and the dimension of the population responses as measured by the participation ratio, PR(Ψ). These terms correspond to statistics of the covariance matrices specified above:

$$c=\frac{{\mathrm{Tr}}({\mathbf{\Phi}}{\mathbf{\Phi}}^{\top })}{{\mathrm{Tr}}({\mathbf{\Psi}}){\mathrm{Tr}}({\mathbf{\Omega}} )}$$	(6)
$${\rm{PR}}(\mathbf{\Psi} )=\frac{{\rm{Tr}}{(\mathbf{\Psi} )}^{2}}{{\rm{Tr}}({\mathbf{\Psi} }^{2})}$$	(7)
$$f=\frac{{\rm{Tr}}{({\mathbf{\Phi}}{\mathbf{\Phi }}^{\top })}^{2}}{{\rm{Tr}}(\mathbf{\Omega} ){\rm{Tr}}(\mathbf{\Phi }^{\top }\mathbf{\Phi} {\mathbf{\Omega} }^{-1}{\mathbf{\Phi} }^{\top }\mathbf{\Phi} )}$$	(8)
$$s=\frac{{\mathrm{Tr}}{({\mathbf{\Phi}}{\mathbf{\Phi }}^{\top })}^{2}}{{\mathrm{Tr}}(\mathbf{\Omega} ){\mathrm{Tr}}({\mathbf{\Phi} }^{\top }(\mathbf{\Psi} -\mathbf{\Phi} {\mathbf{\Omega} }^{-1}{\mathbf{\Phi} }^{\top })\mathbf{\Phi} )}$$	(9)

Because the function \(F(w)=\frac{1}{\pi }{\tan }^{-1}\left(\sqrt{w-1}\right)\) is strictly increasing, we can see that the error is a decreasing function of each of these geometric terms. Note that, in writing equation (5), we have separated a term that depends on the number of training samples, 1 / [c2PR(Ψ)], from a term that is independent of the sample size, 1 / f + 1 / s. Thus, we can see that the correlation and dimension terms become less important as p grows.

We give a detailed discussion motivating the mathematical definitions of these terms in Supplementary Information section 3. To summarize, the definition of c corresponds to a normalized sum of squared covariances between all single units and latent variables and is, thus, a multidimensional generalization of the Pearson correlation coefficient between neural responses and latent variables. The participation ratio is a standard measure of the dimension of a neural representation (see, for example, refs. 57,58). Turning to the factorization measures, the term f measures the overall degree to which independent latent variables are represented along uncorrelated coding directions (Supplementary Fig. 2), and the term s measures the amount of noise that lies along the signal directions. To see this, first note that the neural noise is described by the noise covariance matrix, cov(x∣z) = Ψ − ΦΩ−1ΦT, which appears in the definition of s above. Under the Gaussian model, this matrix measures the covariability of signal-unrelated, trial-to-trial fluctuations in pairs of units. On the other hand, the matrix cov(x) − cov(x∣z) = ΦΩ−1Φ⊤ measures the signal-related covariability of pairs of units, motivating its appearance in the definition of f27,28. The terms in the denominators of s and f give the projections of neural coding directions onto signal and noise subspaces, whereas the term \({\rm{Tr}}{(\mathbf{\Phi\Phi }^{\top })}^{2}\) acts as a normalization. Given that ‘neural noise’ likely includes variability that is related to variables that are not measured experimentally, we additionally describe, in the Supplementary Information, how these two factorization terms can be collapsed into a single factorization term.

Gaussian simulations

To test our theory on data points that violate the assumptions of our theory, we began by sampling from a finite Gaussian model. Specifically, we drew latent vectors, zμ, from a multivariate Gaussian distribution whose covariance matrix had eigenvalues that decayed as a power law with rate α. Specifically, we set: ωi = 5i−α, where α is the power law of the spectrum, and ωi is the i-th eigenvalue of the latent covariance. The neural responses were then given by the formula xμ = Azμ for a random n × d Gaus